>> Woodruff: IN INDIA TODAY,
SUPPORTERS OF OPPOSITION LEADER
NARENDRA MODI CELEBRATED A
DECISIVE ELECTION VICTORY FOR
HIS HINDU NATIONALIST PARTY AND
THE END OF THE RULING CONGRESS
PARTY'S LONG HOLD ON POWER.
GOOD EVENING.
I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
ALSO AHEAD, GWEN IFILL'S
ROUNDTABLE DISCUSSION ON THE
LEGACY OF "BROWN VERSUS THE
BOARD OF EDUCATION" AS 60 YEARS
LATER AMERICAN SCHOOLS ARE
BECOMING SEGREGATED AGAIN.
>> WE WENT IN ONE GENERATION
BECAUSE OF BROWN FROM BEING A
COUNTRY WHERE A MAJORITY OF
PEOPLE ACCEPTED RACIAL HIERARCHY
AND SUPREMACY TO WHERE A
MAJORITY ABSOLUTELY REJECT THAT.
WE ARE FINDING TOO MANY PLACE
RACIALLY SEGREGATED AND ALSO TOO
MANY PLACES WE'RE
>> Woodruff: AND IT'S FRIDAY.
COMMUNICATING
LESSENS OF VALUE TO OUR KIDS.
>> Woodruff: AND IT'S FRIDAY.
MARK SHIELDS AND DAVID BROOKS
ARE HERE TO ANALYZE THE WEEK'S
NEWS.
THOSE ARE JUST SOME OF THE
STORIES WE'RE COVERING ON
TONIGHT'S PBS NEWSHOUR.
>> Woodruff: FIREFIGHTERS
WRANGLED FIVE OF THE TEN
WILDFIRES BURNING AROUND SAN
DIEGO, CALIFORNIA TODAY THANKS
TO COOLER TEMPERATURES AND
CALMER WINDS.
BUT AT THE MARINE CORP'S CAMP
PENDLETON BASE, TWO FIRES FLARED
UP OVERNIGHT.
ONE GREW FROM 600 TO 8,000
ACRES.
ELSEWHERE, EVACUEES WERE
PERMITTED TO RETURN HOME TO
SURVEY THE DAMAGE.
OFFICIALS ARE STILL
INVESTIGATING THE POSSIBILITY OF
ARSON.
ALL TOLD, 120,000 PEOPLE WERE
UNDER EVACUATION ORDERS AT SOME
POINT THIS WEEK.
THE U.S. DEPARTMENT OF
TRANSPORTATION SLAPPED A MAXIMUM
$35-MILLION FINE ON GENERAL
MOTORS TODAY FOR MISHANDLING ITS
IGNITION SWITCH DEFECTS.
THE PROBLEM AFFECTED SOME 2.6
MILLION CARS AND, ACCORDING TO
G.M., RESULTED IN AT LEAST 13
DEATHS.
IT TOOK THE NATION'S LARGEST
AUTOMAKER NEARLY A DECADE TO
ORDER RECALLS AFTER ENGINEERS
DISCOVERED THE DEFECT.
TRANSPORTATION SECRETARY ANTHONY
FOXX SAID THAT'S UNACCEPTABLE.
>> WE KNOW NO ONE IS PERFECT.
BUT WHAT WE CANNOT TOLERATE,
WHAT WE WILL NEVER ACCEPT IS A
PERSON OR A COMPANY THAT KNOWS
DANGER EXISTS AND SAYS NOTHING.
LITERALLY SILENCE CAN KILL.
>> Woodruff: FOR ITS PART,
G.M.'S C.E.O MARY BARRA ISSUED A
STATEMENT SAYING:
THE TOP HEALTH OFFICIAL AT THE
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS
AFFAIRS HAS RESIGNED.
DR. ROBERT PETZEL GAVE HIS
RESIGNATION A DAY AFTER
TESTIFYING BEFORE A SENATE PANEL
ON THE DEPARTMENT'S FAILURES TO
PROVIDE ADEQUATE HEALTH CARE FOR
THE NATION'S VETERANS.
IT COMES IN THE WAKE OF
ALLEGATIONS OF TREATMENT DELAYS
AND FALSIFIED RECORDS AT V.A.
HOSPITALS, INCLUDING ONE IN
PHOENIX WHERE ALLEGEDLY UP TO 40
VETERANS DIED WHILE AWAITING
CARE.
TWIN BLASTS WENT OFF IN THE
KENYAN CAPITAL OF NAIROBI TODAY.
AT LEAST TEN PEOPLE WERE KILLED
AND 70 MORE INJURED.
POLICE SAID TWO IMPROVISED
EXPLOSIVE DEVICES WERE DETONATED
IN A MARKET AREA NEAR NAIROBI'S
DOWNTOWN.
THE WHITE HOUSE CONDEMNED THE
BOMBING AS U.S. AMBASSADOR TO
KENYA REQUESTED MORE SECURITY
AND IS REDUCING THE NUMBER OF
STAFF STATIONED AT THE EMBASSY
IN NAIROBI.
IN TURKEY, PROTESTS AGAINST LAX
SAFETY CONDITIONS IN THE
COUNTRY'S COAL MINES TURNED
VIOLENT TODAY.
POLICE FIRED WATER CANNON, TEAR
GAS AND RUBBER BULLETS INTO A
CROWD OF THOUSANDS GATHERED IN
THE TOWN OF SOMA.
THAT'S WHERE ALMOST 300 MINERS
WERE KILLED IN AN UNDERGROUND
EXPLOSION AND FIRE ON TUESDAY.
THE TURKISH GOVERNMENT AND THE
MINE'S OPERATORS DENIED ANY
NEGLIGENCE WAS TO BLAME FOR THE
DISASTER.
ON WALL STREET TODAY, STOCKS
STAGED A LATE AFTERNOON REBOUND.
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
GAINED 44 POINTS TO CLOSE AT
16,491.
THE NASDAQ ROSE 21 POINTS TO
CLOSE AT 4,090.
THE S&P 500 WAS UP SEVEN POINTS
TO CLOSE ABOVE 1,877.
FOR THE WEEK, THE DOW SLIPPED
MORE THAN HALF A PERCENT.
THE NASDAQ GAINED HALF A
PERCENT.
AND THE S&P WAS LARGELY
UNCHANGED.
JEB MAGRUDER, WHO WAS JAILED FOR
HIS ROLE IN THE WATERGATE
SCANDAL, DIED ON SUNDAY OF
COMPLICATIONS FROM A STROKE.
MAGRUDER WORKED AS AN AIDE TO
PRESIDENT NIXON AND THEN HELPED
RUN HIS RE-ELECTION CAMPAIGN IN
1972.
IT WAS THEN THAT HE CONSPIRED TO
BREAK INTO THE DEMOCRATIC
NATIONAL COMMITTEE HEADQUARTERS
AT THE WATERGATE AND BUG THE
CHAIRMAN'S PHONE.
IN LATER YEARS, MAGRUDER CLAIMED
HE HEARD PRESIDENT NIXON ORDER
THE BREAK-IN.
JEB MAGRUDER WAS 79 YEARS OLD.
STILL TO COME ON THE NEWSHOUR,
AN OPPOSITION PARTY IN INDIA
WINS A HISTORIC VICTORY IN THE
WORLD'S LARGEST DEMOCRACY,
MARGARET WARNER WITH THE LATEST
FROM UKRAINE.
HAS THE PROMISE BEEN FULFILLED,
60 YEARS AFTER A LANDMARK RULING
STRUCK DOWN SEGREGATED
EDUCATION?
PLUS, MARK SHIELDS AND DAVID
BROOKS ON THE WEEK'S NEWS.
>> Woodruff: IN INDIA, THE
RESULTS OF THE LARGEST
DEMOCRATIC ELECTION IN HUMAN
HISTORY CAME IN TODAY, SWEEPING
INTO POWER A HINDU NATIONALIST
PARTY WHOSE LEADER WAS ONCE
BARRED FROM ENTERING THE UNITED
STATES.
>> Sreenivasan: CELEBRATIONS
ERUPTED IN NEW DELHI TODAY.
SUPPORTERS OF NARENDRA MODI, THE
NEW PRIME MINISTER OF INDIA,
DANCED AS ELECTION RESULTS WERE
ANNOUNCED.
>> ( translated ): I THANK ALL
OF YOU FROM MY HEART AND I
SALUTE ALL OF YOU.
YOU ALL HAVE CARRIED OUT A GREAT
RESPONSIBILITY.
TODAY, IN THE HISTORY OF 60
YEARS OF INDIAN DEMOCRACY, YOU
HAVE CREATED A NEW RECORD.
>> Sreenivasan: THE HISTORIC
>> Sreenivasan: OVER THE COURSE
OF FIVE WEEKS, 814 MILLION
ELIGIBLE VOTERS MADE THEIR WAY
TO THE POLLS IN THE MOST
EXPENSIVE GENERAL ELECTION IN
THE COUNTRY'S HISTORY, TO
REPLACE THE CURRENT PRIME
MINISTER, MANMOHAN SINGH.
MODI'S OPPOSITION PARTY,
BHARATIYA JANATA, OR B.J.P,
DEALT A DECISIVE BLOW TO THE
POLITICAL DYNASTY OF THE NEHRU
GANDHI FAMILY.
THEIR INDIA NATIONAL CONGRESS
PARTY HAS DOMINATED IN THE
COUNTRY SINCE ITS INDEPENDENCE.
RAHUL GANDHI FELL ON HIS SWORD
AT A CONCESSION SPEECH EARLIER
TODAY.
>> CONGRESS PARTY HAS DONE
PRETTY BADLY.
THERE IS A LOT FOR US TO THINK
ABOUT AND AS VICE-PRESIDENT OF
THE PARTY I HOLD MYSELF
RESPONSIBLE FOR WHAT HAS
HAPPENED.
>> Sreenivasan: GANDHI FAILED TO
CONVINCE HIS COUNTRYMEN THAT HIS
PARTY COULD TACKLE GOVERNMENT
CORRUPTION AND REVIVE INDIA'S
STAGNANT ECONOMY.
MODI CAPITALIZED ON VOTER
DISATISFACTION WITH THE PROMISE
OF A "NEW INDIA."
>> ( translated ): YOU HAVE
GIVEN 60 YEARS TO CONGRESS, TRY
GIVING ME 60 MONTHS!
>> Sreenivasan: HIS PRO-BUSINESS
IS POPULAR WITH MANY INDIANS.
AS CHIEF MINISTER OF THE STATE
OF GUJARAT FOR FOUR TERMS, HE
BROUGHT PROSPERITY TO THE
STATE'S MAIN CITY OF AHMEDABAD,
EMPHASIZING FOREIGN INVESTMENTS
AND DEVELOPMENT OF PUBLIC
INFRASTRUCTURE.
WHILE MUCH OF INDIA STRUGGLES TO
STAY ON THE WORLD'S ECONOMIC
STAGE, MANY RESIDENTS LOOK TO
GUJARAT'S SUCCESS AS AN
INDICATION OF WHAT HE COULD
BRING TO THE REST OF THE
COUNTRY.
( translated ): THERE IS NO ONE
ELSE CAPABLE FOR PRIME
MINISTER'S POST OTHER THAN MODI.
FOR COUNTRY'S SECURITY, IT IS
VERY ESSENTIAL FOR MODI TO
BECOME THE PRIME MINISTER.
>> Sreenivasan: BUT DESPITE THE
OVERWHELMING POPULARITY, MODI
HAS EMERGED AS ONE OF THE MOST
POLARIZING POLITICIANS ACROSS
INDIA.
HIS NATIONALIST PARTY HAS TIES
TO HINDU FUNDAMENTALISM AND MODI
HIMSELF HAS A CONTROVERSIAL
PAST.
IN 2002, VIOLENT RIOTS BROKE OUT
ALONG SECTARIAN LINES ACROSS
GUJARAT, KILLING MORE THAN 1,000
PEOPLE-- MOSTLY MUSLIMS.
HINDU-MUSLIM VIOLENCE REACHED AN
UNPRECEDENTED LEVEL SINCE THE
TIME OF THE PARTITION OF INDIA
AND PAKISTAN.
MODI OVERSAW ALL OF THIS, AS
HEAD OF THE STATE AND IS BLAMED
FOR DOING NOTHING TO STOP THE
VIOLENCE.
THE UNITED STATES REVOKED THE
LEADER'S VISA OVER THE INCIDENTS
IN 2005.
FOR NOW HOWEVER, THOSE ISSUES
ARE FAR FROM THE MINDS OF MODI'S
MILLIONS OF SUPPORTERS, WHO ARE
CELEBRATING THEIR LEADER'S
HISTORIC VICTORY.
>> Woodruff: IN A PHONE CALL
TODAY, PRESIDENT OBAMA INVITED
THE PRIME MINISTER ELECT TO
VISIT WASHINGTON.
TO TELL US MORE WHAT THE MODI
VICTORY MEANS FOR INDIA AND THE
UNITED STATES, I'M JOINED BY
SUMIT GANGULY, A POLITICAL
SCIENCE PROFESSOR AT INDIANA
UNIVERSITY IN BLOOMINGTON AND
TANVI MADAN IS DIRECTOR OF THE
INDIA PROJECT AT THE BROOKINGS
INSTITUTION.
WELCOME YOU BOTH TO THE PROGRAM.
TANVI MADAN, TELL US MORE ABOUT
WHO NARENDRA MODI IS.
>> THE PRIME MINISTERIAL
CANDIDATE IN INDIA.
HE IS THE CHIEF MINISTER OF THE
WESTERN STATE.
HE'S A MAN WHO GENERATES HOPE
AND CONCERN AMONGST THE VOTERS
AND CLEARLY THE VOTERS HAVE SAID
HOPE HAS DRAWN CONCERN IN THIS
CASE.
>> Woodruff: LET ME TURN TO
YOU, SUMIT GANGULY.
WHY DID HIS MESSAGE RESONATE
WITH SO MANY VOTERS THIS TIME?
>> I THINK HIS MESSAGE RESONATED
SO CLEARLY WITH SO MANY VOTERS
ON THIS PARTICULARLY OCCASION IS
BECAUSE OF THREE REASONS.
FIRST, THE RANK INEPTITUDE OF
THE CONGRESS PARTY IN TERMS OF
GOVERNING THE COUNTRY OVER THE
LAST FIVE YEARS, THE ANEMIC
RECORD OF ECONOMIC GROWTH, AND
THE WIDESPREAD CORRUPTION
SCANDALS ASSOCIATED WITH THE
PARTY.
ALL THESE THREE THINGS COMBINED
REALLY SANK THE CONGRESS PARTY
AND SIMULTANEOUS MODI'S MESSAGE
OF HOPE, OF PROSPERITY, OF
BRINGING EMPLOYMENT
OPPORTUNITIES TO A WHOLE
GENERATION OF ASPIRING INDIANS I
THINK WORKED EXCEEDINGLY WELL
WITH THE ELECTORATE.
>> Woodruff: TANVI MADAN, WHAT
WOULD YOU ADD TO THAT?
WHAT IS HE SAYING TO VOTERS THAT
MADE THEM WANT TO SUPPORT HIM?
>> HE SEEMED TO RUN ON ONE
PLATFORM, DEVELOPMENT.
I'M GOING TO DELIVER GOOD
GROWTH, GOVERNANCE AND GET
THINGS DONE.
AS SUMIT SAID, HE'S PORTRAYING
IT IN OPPOSITION TO THE
GOVERNMENT LED BY THE CONGRESS
PARTY AND THE COALITION WERE
STANDING FOR.
>> Woodruff: SO WHAT DOES HE
WANT TO DO DIFFERENTLY?
WHAT IS HE SAYING HE WOULD --
BECAUSE I READ A COUPLE OF
STORIES TODAY THAT SAID MANY
VOTERS WERE FOR HIM BUT NOT SURE
WHAT HE'LL DO ONCE IN OFFICE.
>> I THINK THERE ARE TWO
CHALLENGES HE WILL FACE, ONE IS
TO ACTUALLY DELIVER ON THE
ECONOMIC PROMISES HE HAS MADE
INCLUDING INCREASING INVESTMENT.
SO BETTER INVESTMENT CLIMATE IS
SOMETHING HE PROMISED.
THE OTHER CHALLENGE IS GOING TO
BE TO ACTUALLY CONVINCE INDIANS,
NOT JUST THE 31% WHO VOTED FOR
HIM, THAT HE CAN BE A TRULY GOOD
PRIME MINISTER.
>> Woodruff: ARE THOSE HIS
MAIN CHALLENGES SUMIT GANGULY?
>> I THINK THOSE ARE HIS
PRINCIPLE CHALLENGES AND ALSO HE
RAISED EXPECTATIONS TO SUCH A
HIGH EXTENT.
NOW, UNLESS HE CAN DELIVER,
PARTICULARLY ON THE PROMISE OF
ECONOMIC GROWTH, I THINK THERE
IS GOING TO BE A GREAT DEAL OF
DISILLUSIONMENT.
I ALSO WISH TO UNDERSCORE A
POINT TANVI MADE, NAMELY THERE'S
A SEGMENT OF THE POPULATION
PARTICULARLY AMONGST THE MUSLIM
COMMUNITY THAT A REMAINS
UNDERSTANDABLY AND DEEPLY
SKEPTICAL OF THIS PARTICULAR
PRIME MINISTERIAL CANDIDATE AND
ON THE VERGE OF BECOMING THE
PRIME MINISTER, AND THEIR
REASONS ARE QUITE FOUND AND HE
HAS TO FIND A WAY TO REASSURE
THEM THAT, AS PRIME MINISTER, HE
WILL NOT BE COMPLETELY OBLIVIOUS
TO THEIR CONCERNS AND TO THEIR
INTERESTS.
>> Woodruff: SKEPTICAL OF HIM
WHY?
>> SKEPTICAL OF HIM BECAUSE OF
HIS RECORD IN GUJARAT, IN THE
WAKE OF THIS TERRIBLE PROGRAM
THAT SWEPT THROUGH THE STATE IN
FEBRUARY 2002, HE HAS SCARESLY
APOLOGIZED FOR THE TERRIBLE
TRAGEDY.
IN FACT, WHEN HE SOUGHT TO
APOLOGIZE IN RESPONSE TO A
QUESTION, THE CHARACTERIZATION
WAS, IN MY VIEW, RATHER
DISTRESSING BECAUSE HE SAID,
YES, HE FELT THE SAME SORT OF
SORROW THAT ONE MIGHT FEEL IF A
CAR RAN OVER A PUPPY.
THAT'S HARDLY THE MANNER IN
WHICH A NATIONAL LEADER SHOULD
TALK ABOUT A COLOSSAL HUMAN
TRAGEDY.
>> Woodruff: IF HE HAS THIS
SERIOUS THING IN HIS PAST, TAV I
MADAN, WHY DO YOU THINK HE WON
SUCH A BIG VICTORY?
>> I THINK THE VOTERS, AT LEAST
31% IN THE PARLIAMENTARY SYSTEM
THAT CAN ACTUALLY GET YOU THE
MAJORITY, BELIEVE HE CAN
ACTUALLY FOCUS ON THE
DEVELOPMENT SIDE OF HIS PLATFORM
AND STAY AWAY FROM WHAT THEY
THINK WILL BE THESE OTHER ISSUES
THAT WOULD BE A CONCERN.
BUT SOME OF HIS BASE MIGHT
ACTUALLY PUSH HIM --
>> Reporter: MIGHT PUSH HIM --
PUSH HIM TOWARDS A MORE HINDU
NATIONALIST APPROACH AS OPPOSED
TO A GROWTH FIRST APPROACH.
>> Woodruff: HINDU NATIONALIST
APPROACH.
EXPLAIN WHAT THAT WOULD MEAN TO
AN AMERICAN AUDIENCE.
>> IT WOULD MEAN ESSENTIALLY
SAYING INDIA IS A COUNTRY FIRST
AND FOREMOST FOR HINDUS AND
OTHERS HAVE TO FIT IN, IN A
MESSAGE OF TOLERANCE AND
INCLUSIVENESS, WHICH TODAY IN
HIS SPEECH HE SAID HE WOULD GOSH
ON.
>> Woodruff: WE REPORTED,
SUMIT GANGULY, PRESIDENT OBAMA
ALREADY INVITED HIM TO COME TO
THE U.S. FOR A VISIT.
HOW DO YOU THINK THAT WILL
CHANGE INDIA-U.S. RELATIONS?
>> MUCH DEPENDS ON WHAT MR. MODI
CAN DO TO FOSTER A MORE
CONDUCIVE ECONOMIC CLIMATE, MAKE
IT MORE ATTRACTIVE TO AMERICAN
INVESTORS, AND ALSO TACKLE A
NUMBER OF ONGOING ISSUES IN
INDIA-U.S. RELATIONS WHICH
REMAIN IN ABEIANS.
FOR EXAMPLE, THE LEGAL REGIME
THAT WAS CREATED FOR A FOREIGN
INVESTMENT IN THE INDIA NUCLEAR
POWER INDUSTRY IN THE WAKE OF
THE U.S.-INDIA NUCLEAR AGREEMENT
OF 2008.
IT HAS SUCH DRACONIAN PROVISIONS
THAT NO AMERICAN COMPANY IS
GOING TO DARE INVEST IN INDIA,
AND THIS HAS BEEN A SERIOUSLY
CONTENTION ISSUE IN INDIA-U.S.
RELATIONS, AND THE PAST
GOVERNMENT SOUGHT TO SOFTTON LAW
BUT REALLY DIDN'T SUCCEED, AND
THIS IS SOMETHING THAT THE OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION OBVIOUSLY IS
GOING TO LOOK FORWARD TO.
AND I CAN THINK OF A WHOLE HOST
OF OTHER SIMILAR ISSUES WHERE
THERE ARE IMPORTANT DIFFERENCES
BETWEEN YAIND AND THE UNITED
STATES, PRIMARILY IN THE
ECONOMIC REALM, AND IF MODI IS
SERIOUS ABOUT GRASPING THE
ECONOMIC NETTLE, THESE ARE SOME
OF THE ISSUES HE WILL HAVE TO
TACKLE.
>> Woodruff: TANVI MADAN,
QUICKLY TO WRAP UP, WHAT SHOULD
WE LOOK TO TO MEASURE THE NEW
SHAPE OF THE U.S.-INDIA
RELATIONSHIP UNDER HIM?
>> I THINK THE FIRST THING WE
WILL SEE IS WHO HE ACTUALLY
APPOINTS TO CERTAIN KEY
POSITIONS.
WE'LL HAVE TO LOOK AT WHO HE
APPOINTS NATIONAL SECURITY NATIY
ADVISOR, FOREIGN MINISTER,
DEFENSE MINISTER, BUT, ALSO,
BROADLY, WHAT IS THE MESSENGER
HE SENDS ON THE ECONOMIC SIDE
AND THE FOREIGN POLICY SIDE, NOT
JUST THE U.S.-INDIA RELATIONS
BUT OTHER RELATIONS INCLUDING
PAKISTAN AND CHINA.
>> Woodruff: TANVI MADAN AND
SUMIT GANGULY, THANK YOU BOTH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Woodruff: PRESIDENT OBAMA
SPOKE WITH FRANCE'S PRESIDENT
FRANCOIS HOLLANDE TODAY AND THE
TWO AGREED THAT RUSSIA WILL FACE
SIGNIFICANT ADDITIONAL COSTS FOR
WHAT THE WHITE HOUSE CALLS
PROVOCATIVE AND DESTABILIZING
BEHAVIOR IN UKRAINE.
OUR OWN MARGARET WARNER HEADS
BACK TO UKRAINE TOMORROW AND
JOINS ME NOW TO DISCUSS THIS
WEEK'S MAJOR DEVELOPMENTS IN THE
COUNTRY'S CRISIS.
MARGARET, YOU'RE OFF.
BEFORE YOU GO, TELL US WHAT THE
STATE OF PLAY IS BECAUSE, JUST A
FEW DAYS AGO, THE
POST-SEPARATISTS HAD WHAT THEY
CALL A REFERENDUM AND THEY SAY A
LOT OF PEOPLE WANT INDEPENDENCE.
>> THE IMMEDIATE RESULTS WERE
NOT PROMISING, JUDY.
NEITHER SIDE STOOD DOWN.
THE KIEV GOVERNMENT KEPT THEIR
FORCES IN THE EAST AND
PRO-RUSSIAN SEPARATISTS WHO WERE
ARMED KEPT THE BUILDINGS AND
MORE PEOPLE WERE KILLED.
BUT THERE WAS A DRAMATIC
DEVELOPMENT I HEARD WAS COMING
THIS WEEKEND IS FINALLY THE
PEOPLE OF EASTERN UKRAINE WHO
SAY TO POLLSTERS THEY ACTUALLY
WANT TO STAY PART OF UKRAINE
ROSE UP IN THE FORM OF THOUSANDS
OF MINERS, STEEL AND COAL
MINERS, ALL EMPLOYED BY THE SOUP
RICH OLIGARCH SHOWED UP TO JOIN
THE LOCAL POLICE IN PATROLLING
THESE STREETS AND ALL THEY HAD
WAS THEIR HARD HATS.
THEY QUADRUPLED THE SIZE OF THE
LOCAL POLICE, HAD BEEN TOTALLY
OUTGUNNED AND OTTOMANNED BY THE
SEPARATISTS, AND THE SEPARATISTS
MELTED AWAY.
IN ONE CITY, IN A CRITICAL CITY
ON THE ROUTE BETWEEN RUSSIA TO
CRIMEA.
SO IT IS RISKY, HOWEVER, BECAUSE
THE SEPARATISTS DID NOT
SURRENDER THEIR WEAPONS.
THEY COULD COME BACK, REGROUP,
COME BACK AND TRY TO FIGHT THESE
MINERS, IN WHICH CASE YOU WOULD
ENTER A CIVIL STRIFE OF A KIND
WE HAVEN'T SEEN BEFORE.
>> Woodruff: MEANWHILE THE
CENTRAL GOVERNMENT IN KIEV HAVE
BEEN TAKING STEPS TO TRY TO COME
TOGETHER WITH THE SEPARATISTS?
>> TO SHOW THEY'RE LISTENING TO
EASTERN UKRAINE SAYING IT WANTS
MORE TIME AND DECENTRALIZATION.
GET THE GOVERNORS ELECTED AND
KEEP MORE OF THEIR REVENUE.
WE STARTED A ROUND-TABLE
DISCUSSION IN KIEV WEDNESDAY
CALLED MODERATED BY THE
PAN-EUROPEAN SECURITY GROUP THAT
THE U.S. BELONGS TO AS WELL AS
RUSSIA AND UKRAINE, AND HEADED
BY A VERY PROMINENT GERMAN
DIPLOMAT, AND THEY GOT ALMOST
EVERYBODY TO PARTICIPATE, ALL
THE PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES,
PEOPLE FROM ALL REGIONS
INCLUDING THE EAST BUT NOT ARMED
SEPARATISTS.
I ASKED THE U.S. OFFICIALS ABOUT
THAT YESTERDAY BECAUSE THAT'S
WHAT THE HEADLINES WERE ABOUT
AND HE SAID YOU ALL ARE MISSING
THE POINT, THEY WEREN'T INVITED.
THERE WAS ONE ON MOUSE NOTE
WHICH IS THEY'RE GOING TO TAKE
THE SHOW ON THE ROAD TO THE
EAST.
TOMORROW TRY TO MEET IN DONETSK,
BUT OFFICIALS YESTERDAY SAID
SECURITY IS AN ISSUE.
YOU CAN'T TAKE ALL THE LEADERS
OF UKRAINE OVER THERE IF IT'S
NOT SAFE.
THEY'RE GOING TO A DIFFERENT
CITY.
>> Woodruff: YOU HAVE BEEN YOU
TALKING TO U.S. AND UKRAINIAN
OFFICIALS.
WHERE DO THEY SEE RUSSIA AND
WHAT PUTIN WANTS.
>> THEY DON'T KNOW.
EVERYONE'S GIVEN UP TRYING TO
FIGURE OUT WHAT PUTIN IS UP TO.
THEY THINK HE'S TOTALLY RUNNING
THE SHOW SO DISCOUNT WHAT THE
FOREIGN MINISTER SAYS.
NO DOUBT HE PULLED BACK LAST
WEEK.
SAID WHY DON'T YOU DELAY THE
REFERENDUM ON INDEPENDENCE.
MAYBE THE MAY 25 ELECTION IS THE
STEP IN THE RIGHT DIRECTION, BUT
HE HAS NOT MOVED FORCES OR TAKEN
OUT SPECIALISTS SAID TO BE
ADVISING, THESE ARE SAID TO BE
RUSSIAN EXPERTS TRAINED IN
INSURGENT OPERATIONS ADVISING
THE SEPARATISTS, SO HE'S KEEPING
HIS OPTIONS OPEN.
THE FEAR IS HE WILL EITHER TRY
TO DESTABILIZE THE SITUATION IN
EASTERN UKRAINE THAT THIS MAY 25
ELECTION WHICH IS SO KEY TO
RESTORE OUR LEGITIMATE
GOVERNMENT WITH KIEV LOOKS ILL
ILLEGITIMATE BECAUSE IT'S NOT
REPRESENTATIVE, AND SO THE U.S.
AND EUROPE ARE TRYING TO SEND
CLEAR SIGNALS THAT IF YOU DO
THAT YOU CROSS THE LINE AND WE
IMPOSE STRONGER SANCTIONS.
AS YOU REPORTED, PRESIDENT OBAMA
SAID THAT TODAY, THAT WAS THE IF
YOU REMEMBER ONE TAKEAWAY FROM
THE READOUT THE WHITE HOUSE
TOOK.
I'LL COVER NEXT WEEK CAN THEY
PULL OFF THE MAY 25 ELECTION AND
WHAT ARE THE FORCES PULLING AND
TUGGING IN BOTH WAYS.
>> Woodruff: WE'LL BE LOOKING
FOR THE REPORT.
WE'LL SEE YOU THERE MONDAY
NIGHT.
>> LOOK FORWARD TO IT.
>> Woodruff: THANK YOU.
>> Woodruff: SATURDAY MARKS 60
YEARS SINCE THE LANDMARK SUPREME
COURT DECISION THAT DECLARED
SEPARATE SCHOOLS FOR BLACK AND
WHITE STUDENTS UNCONSTITUTIONAL.
GWEN IFILL RECORDED A
CONVERSATION ABOUT THE
ANNIVERSARY EARLIER THIS WEEK.
BUT FIRST, SOME BACKGROUND.
>> Ifill: THE CASE WAS NAMED FOR
LINDA BROWN, A THIRD GRADER IN
TOPEKA, KANSAS FORCED TO TRAVEL
MORE THAN AN HOUR EACH DAY TO AN
ALL-BLACK ELEMENTARY SCHOOL,
RATHER THAN ATTEND THE ALL-WHITE
SCHOOL LOCATED JUST BLOCKS FROM
HER HOME.
GOVERNMENT-SANCTIONED RACIAL
DISCRIMINATION WAS THE LAW OF
THE LAND IN 1954.
THE SUPREME COURT'S "PLESSY V.
FERGUSON" RULING HALF A CENTURY
EARLIER HAD RULED THAT, AS LONG
AS SEPARATE FACILITIES WERE
CONSIDERED EQUAL, SEGREGATION
ITSELF WAS NOT A VIOLATION THE
CONSTITUTION'S EQUAL PROTECTION
CLAUSE.
BUT THE BROWNS-- LINDA AND HER
TWO SISTERS-- WHO WERE JOINED BY
FAMILIES OF STUDENTS IN FOUR
STATES AND THE DISTRICT OF
COLUMBIA SAID NO.
THEIR CLASS-ACTION SUIT
EVENTUALLY REACHED THE SUPREME
COURT.
RETIRED BALTIMORE PUBLIC SCHOOL
PRINCIPAL JOHN STOKES WAS ONE OF
THE ORIGINAL PLAINTIFFS IN THE
VIRGINIA CASE INCLUDED IN THE
BROWN LITIGATION.
>> IT WAS SEPARATE, BUT IT WAS
NEVER EQUAL.
>> Ifill: HE DESCRIBES THE
CONDITIONS AT HIS OVERCROWDED
ALL-BLACK HIGH SCHOOL IN
FARMVILLE, VIRGINIA AS
"DEPLORABLE," WITH NO RUNNING
WATER OR INDOOR PLUMBING, AND A
POTBELLY STOVE THAT LEAKED SOOT
INTO THE CLASSROOM.
>> WE KNEW WE WERE BEING
PROGRAMMED FOR FAILURE, IT WAS
VERY OBVIOUS.
WE COULD NOT ONLY SEE IT, WE
COULD SMELL IT, AND WHEN THAT
SOOT SETTLED DOWN FROM THAT
FLUE, WE COULD TASTE IT.
WE COULD ACTUALLY TASTE IT.
SO WE KNEW WE HAD TO DO
SOMETHING TO MAKE A CHANGE.
>> Ifill: AFTER STOKES HELPED
ORGANIZE A SCHOOLWIDE WALKOUT,
THE N.A.A.C.P TOOK NOTICE,
ASKING THE MORE THAN 100
STUDENTS INVOLVED TO JOIN THE
BROADER SUIT.
CHIEF COUNSEL THURGOOD MARSHALL,
WHO WOULD LATER BECOME THE
SUPREME COURT'S FIRST AFRICAN-
AMERICAN JUSTICE, LED THE ORAL
ARGUMENTS BEFORE THE COURT.
ON MAY 17, 1954, IN A UNANIMOUS
DECISION CRAFTED BY CHIEF
JUSTICE EARL WARREN, THE HIGH
COURT DECLARED:
>> Ifill: WHEN THE RULING CAME
DOWN, STOKES CELEBRATED,
CAUTIOUSLY.
>> I SAID, "THE WAR HAS JUST
BEGUN."
I SAID THESE FOLKS ARE NOT GOING
TO SIT DOWN AND TAKE THIS
LIGHTLY.
AND THEY DIDN'T.
>> SEGREGATION NOW, SEGREGATION
TOMORROW, SEGREGATION FOREVER.
>> Ifill: INDEED, THE SEPARATE
BUT EQUAL DEBATE WAS FAR FROM
OVER.
OPPOSITION TO THE RULING WAS
FIERCE, ESPECIALLY IN THE SOUTH,
AND ANTI-INTEGRATION PROTESTS
SPRANG UP IN COMMUNITIES AROUND
THE COUNTRY.
BUT THE BROWN RULING PROVED TO
BE THE TURNING POINT THAT LED TO
THE UNRAVELING OF JIM CROW LAWS,
AND PAVED THE WAY FOR THE
PASSAGE OF THE CIVIL RIGHTS ACT
A DECADE LATER.
60 YEARS LATER, JUST HOW FAR
HAVE WE COME IN ELIMINATING
SEGREGATED EDUCATION AND
INCREASING OPPORTUNITY?
FOR A DEEPER LOOK AT THE MANY
ANSWERS TO THOSE QUESTIONS, I'M
JOINED BY CHERYL BROWN
HENDERSON, WHOSE FATHER ALONG
WITH 12 OTHER TOPEKA PARENT
FILED THE ORIGINAL SUIT BROUGHT
BY THE NAACP.
NOW PRESIDENT OF THE BROWN
FOUNDATION FOR EDUCATIONAL
EXCELLENCY AND RESEARCH.
SHERYLL CASHIN, GEORGETOWN
UNIVERSITY LAW SCHOOL, IS THE
AUTHOR OF "PLACE NOT RACE" A
VISION OF OPPORTUNITY IN
AMERICA.
CATHERINE LHAMON, ASSISTANT
SECRETARY OF CIVIL RIGHTS AT THE
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION,
AND JOURNALIST AND AUTHOR RONALD
BROWNSTEIN IS EDITORIAL DIRECTOR
FOR MEDIA AND COLUMNIST FOR
NATIONAL JOURNAL.
WELCOME TO YOU.
I READ THE WORDS OF CHIEF
JUSTICE EARL WARREN IN THE
BROWNE BROWNE DECISION BROWN V
BOARD OF EDUCATION "IT IS
DOUBTFUL ANY CHILD COULD BE
EXPECTED TO SUCCEED IN LIFE IF
DENIED AN EDUCATION.
SUCH PORTUNITY WHERE THE
STATE IS UNDERTAKE TON PROVIDE
IT IS A RIGHT WHICH MUST BE MADE
AVAILABLE TO ALL ON EQUAL TERMS.
CATHERINE LHAMON, 60 YEARS
LATER, THE MAJORITY OF ALL LARGE
SCHOOL DISTRICTS IN AMERICA ARE
MAJORITY NON-WHITE.
HAVE WE FULFILLED THAT PROMISE?
>> WE'VE COME FAR BUT NOT FAR
ENOUGH.
THAT'S THE DEPRESSING REALITY
THAT HAS TO LIGHT A FIRE UNDER
ALL OF US AND CERTAINLY UNDER ME
AND THE WORK THAT I DO AND WE
NEED TO BE WORKING TO DELIVER ON
THAT PROMISE.
BUT THERE ARE SO MANY THINGS
THAT ARE DIFFERENT THAT ARE
BETTER IN THE 60 YEARS SINCE
BROWN WAS DECIDED.
MY MOTHER WAS 10 WHEN BROWN VS.
BOARD OF EDUCATION DECIDED.
HE ATTENDED RACIALLY SEGREGATED
SCHOOLS BEFORE AND AFTER.
BUT IT CHANGED HER LIFE
EXPERIENCE.
I DIDN'T ATTEND SEGREGATED
SCHOOLS AND MY CHILDREN DON'T
AND I'M GRATEFUL FOR THAT.
I WORK EVERY DAY TO MAKE SURE
OTHER PEOPLE'S CHILDREN CAN ALSO
LEARN IN THE EDUCATIONAL
ENVIRONMENTS THAT BROWN DECISION
PROMISED.
>> Ifill: CHERYL BROWN, 60
YEARS LATER, HOW DO YOU LOOK AT
IT?
>> I LOOK AT THE PROMISE.
WE TALK ABOUT THE FACT THE
SEGREGATED SCHOOL SYSTEMS EXIST
STILL AND THAT'S A FUNCTION OF I
THINK THE PUSHBACK IN BROWN V
BOARD BECAUSE POWER PRECEDED
NOTHING.
WHAT POWER DID IS DECIDED WE
WOULD RED LINE AND HAVE CERTAIN
HOUSES AND WORK HARD TO MAKE
SURE SCHOOLS WERE NOT
SEGREGATED.
IN THE STATEMENT YOU READ WHICH
IS MY FAVORITE PART OF THE
DECISION, WE HAVE TO BE
CONCERNED ABOUT EDUCATING OUR
KIDS.
AFRICAN-AMERICAN PARENTS WERE
ONLY CONCERNED ABOUT MAKING SURE
THEIR CHILDREN HAD THE BEST
EDUCATION POSSIBLE.
I THINK SOMETIMES WE SCAPEGOAT
OUR CHILDREN BY SUGGESTING
THEY'RE NOT SITTING NEXT TO
SOMEBODY OF A CERTAIN ETHNICITY
THAT THEY CAN'T POSSIBLY BE
GIVEN A GOOD EDUCATION.
I THINK WE CAN'T BE LOST OF
WHILE WE'RE PURSUING THE GOAL OF
DIVERSITY, WE CAN'T GET LOST IN
EDUCATING OUR CHILDREN WHERE WE
FIND THEM.
>> Ifill: SOUNDS LIKE YOU'RE
SAYING INTEGRATION FOR ITS
SAYING I CAN IS NOT WHAT THE
CASE WAS ABOUT.
SHERYLL, WAS IT WORTH IT?
>> ABSOLUTELY.
WE HAD TO DISMANTLE JIM CROW,
RIGHT?
AND THE DECISION PAID ENORMOUS
PSYCHIC BENEFITS.
IN ONE GENERATION WE WENT WITH
BROWN FROM BEING A MAJORITY OF
THE COUNTRY ACCEPTED RACISM TO
WHERE A MAJORITY OF THE PEOPLE
ABSOLUTELY REJECT THAT.
WHERE WE'VE FALLEN DOWN
POST-BROWN IS WE HAVEN'T BUILT
ENOUGH STRONG MULTI-RACIAL
CONSTITUENCIES FOR PUBLIC
INTEGRATED EDUCATION.
BUT I WANT TO SAY IT'S NOT
HOPELESS.
THE HARTFORD AREA, WHICH IS VERY
SEGREGATED RES DETENTIONLY,
THERE'S A MOVEMENT CALLED THE
CHEF MOVEMENT WHERE ALL RACES
HAVE GOTTEN TOGETHER AND SAID WE
LIKE DIVERSITY, SUPPORT IT AND
CREATED 31 MAGNET SCHOOLS IN
THAT METROPOLITAN AREA THAT
ENABLES PEOPLE OF ALL COLORS TO
ACCESS HIGH-QUALITY EDUCATION
DECOUPLED FROM WHERE THEY LIVE.
SO THERE ARE STRATEGIES THAT
WORK BUT YOU HAVE TO BE OVERT AT
BUILDING CONSTITUENCIES FOR THE
RIGHT POLICIES.
>> Ifill: BUT IT IS STILL TRUE
THAT IF YOUR SCHOOL SYSTEM IS
80% BLACK, YOU DON'T HAVE THE
SAME RESOURCES AS IF YOU WERE
90% WHITE.
SO IS IT BECAUSE THE WORLD IS
CHANGING OR BECAUSE THE LAW
DIDN'T LIVE UP TO ITS PROMISE?
>> THE DECISION WAS A GENUINE
HINGE IN HISTORY.
IT PUT US ON TRACK TO BE THE
NATION WE ARE NOW, A TRULY
DIVERSE, MULTI-WORLD NATION.
THE NUMBERS ARE DRAMATICALLY
DIFFERENT.
BEFORE BROWN, 1 IN 4
AFRICAN-AMERICAN HAD A COLLEGE
DEGREE.
NOW IT'S ABOUT THE SAME.
NO ONE WOULD CLAIM OPPORTUNITY
IS EQUAL AT THIS POINT.
VERY DIFFERENT CIRCUMSTANCES.
THE REALITY IS ROUGHLY
TWO-THIRDS THE THREE-FOURTHS OF
AFRICAN-AMERICAN AND HISPANIC
KIDS ATTEND SCHOOLS IN WHICH A
MAJORITY OF THE STUDENT BODY ARE
QUALIFIED -- CLASSIFIED AS LOW
INCOME.
YOU TALK ABOUT THE RESOURCES.
THE RESOURCES ISSUE IS NOT ONLY
THE AMOUNT OF DOLLARS COMING
INTO THE SCHOOL, IT'S THE
COMMUNITY RESOURCES, THE
PARENTAL RESOURCES AND KIND OF
THE CHALLENGE WE HAVE IN
EDUCATION IS THE SCHOOL -- THE
STUDENTS THAT NEED THE MOST
OFTEN GET THE LEAST IN TERMS OF
THE QUALITY OF THE TEACHERS,
EXPERIENCE.
SO THAT'S A CHALLENGE.
THE NATURE OF THE CHALLENGE IS
CHANGING, THE DEMOGRAPHY IS
CHANGING THE CHALLENGE.
THIS IS THE FUTURE WORKFORCE, A
MAJORITY OF THE K-12 SYSTEM
STARTING SEPTEMBER NATIONWIDE,
NOT ONLY BIG CITIES, WILL BE
KIDS OF COLOR.
THIS IS THE LAST CLASS EVER
PROBABLY IN THE U.S. HISTORY OF
K-12 STUDENTS THAT WILL BE
MAJORITY WHITE.
>> Ifill: WHAT HAPPENED TO ALL
THE DELIBERATE SPEED IN CREATING
THE ENVIRONMENT K-12 ESPECIALLY
THAT THE BROWN DECISION
PROMISED?
>> WHAT OUR HISTORY SHOWED WAS A
LOT OF DELEGATION AND VERY
LITTLE FEET.
IT TOOK FULL TEN YEARS BEFORE WE
BEGAN TO SEE REAL INTEGRATION AT
ALL.
MATERIAL PROGRESS IN 1965 TO
NEIGHBOR 19 # 0 WHERE WE SAW
REAL CHANGE IN INTEGRATION IN
THE SCHOOLS AND THEN A VERY
SIGNIFICANT BACKLASH.
YOU KNOW, THAT WAS -- THAT'S
SIGNIFICANT IN TERMS OF THE
NUMBERS AND WHAT KIDS'
EXPERIENCES ARE IN SCHOOLS
TODAY.
IT'S ALSO SIGNIFICANT IN TERMS
OF THE OPPORTUNITIES THAT WE SEE
FOR OUR KIDS AND I THINK ALL OF
US HAVE BEEN TALKING ABOUT WHAT
IT'S LIKE TO BE A CHILD IN
SCHOOL TODAY.
MY OFFICE WHEN WE DO OUR
INVESTIGATIONS NOW, WE ARE
FINDING TOO MANY PLACES RACIALLY
SEGREGATED AND ALSO FINDING TOO
MANY PLACES WHERE WE'RE
COMMUNICATING A MESSAGE OF VERY
LITTLE VALUE TO OUR KIDS.
WE'RE SAYING YOU'RE NOT WHO WE
EXPECT TO SEE SUCCEED IN SCHOOL,
YOU ARE NOT WHO WE'RE DELIVERING
RESOURCES TO FOR NOT HAVING
EQUITABLE DISTRIBUTION OF
TEACHERS, OF HIGH COURSES IN OUR
SCHOOLS.
WE DISPROPORTIONATELY DISCIPLINE
THE STUDENTS.
IT'S DIRECTLY CONTRARY TO THE
BROWN MESSAGE, FEDERAL PROMS AND
THE LAW ENFORCEMENT THAT'S WHAT
WE NEED TO CHANGE.
>> Ifill: SHERYLL CASHIN,
YOU'VE WRITTEN A BOOK OF TALKS
THAT MAKES A CASE OF WHAT
HAPPENS IN K-12.
WHAT HAPPENS GOING ON TO HIGHER
EDUCATION AND GIVEN WHAT WE'VE
SEEN PLAY OUT IN AFFIRMATIVE
ACTION, HOW DO YOU MAKE THE
PLAYING FIELD LEVEL.
>> UNIVERSITIES HAVE AN
OBLIGATION TO MITIGATE SEPARATE
SCHOOLING.
I ARGUE PLACE NOT RACE.
42% OF AMERICANS OF ALL RACES
LIVE IN MIDDLE CLASS
NEIGHBORHOODS AND THAT'S DOWN
FROM 65% IN 1970, AND
INCREASINGLY THERE'S A
COMMONALITY OF EXPERIENCE
BETWEEN WORKING CLASS STRUGGLING
WHITES AND KIDS OF COLOR.
IF YOU'RE IN A HIGH-OPPORTUNITY
SETTING, YOU HAVE ACCESS TO
SELECTIVE, HIGH QUALITY K-12
EDUCATION.
EVERYONE OUTSIDE THAT CONTEXT
GETS A DIFFERENT DEAL.
I'M ARGUING THERE ARE STRIVERS
FROM ALL NEIGHBORHOODS AND
UNIVERSITIES SHOULD GIVE A LEG
UP IN ADMISSIONS TO
HIGH-ACHIEVING STUDENTS WHO'VE
DONE THE BEST THEY CAN WITH
UNDERRESOURCED SCHOOLS.
BUT I ALSO THINK POST-BROWN,
POST-CIVIL RIGHTS AMERICA, WE
NEED TO HAVE AN OVERT DISCOURSE
WHERE WE LINK THE COMMON
STRUGGLES OF COMMUNITIES OF
COLOR TO STRUGGLING WHITES IN
ORDER FOR US TO -- YOU KNOW,
FRANKLY, YOU TALK ABOUT
BACKLASH, WHERE WE ARE TODAY IS
THERE'S A LOT OF WHITE
RESENTMENT, A LOT OF WHITES FEEL
THAT THE POST-CIVIL RIGHTS GAINS
THAT YOU TALK ABOUT CAME AT
THEIR EXPENSE, AND THERE ARE A
LOT OF PEOPLE OUT THERE,
POLITICIANS, MEDIA, WHO STOKE
THAT RESENTMENT, AND THAT'S THE
TRUE CHALLENGE FOR PROGRESSIVES.
>> Ifill: LET ME ASK CHERYL
BROWN HENDERSON ABOUT THIS
BECAUSE, IF INDEED WE ARE
FALLING SHORT OR THIS INEQUITY
IS SUCH THAT THE PLAYING FIELD
IS NOT YET LEVEL, WHY DO YOU
THINK THAT IS?
>> THE BACKLASH BEGAN
IMMEDIATELY AND IT WAS
RELENTLESS AND HASN'T LET UP.
FOR EXAMPLE THE SOUTHERN
MANIFESTO AND SOME OF THE
DOCUMENTS COMING OUT OF OUR
LEADERS IN CONGRESS, AND THEN
SCHOOLS CLOSING.
WHAT GREATER MENTION CAN YOU
SEND THAN I'M GOING TO CLOSE
PUBLIC SCHOOLS FOR FIVE YEARS AS
IN VIRGINIA RATHER THAN ALLOWING
AFRICAN-AMERICAN STUDENTS IN.
SO THIS HAS BEEN RELENTLESS.
AND THURGOOD MARSHALL, ONE OF
THE COMMENTS I FOUND REALLY
PROFOUND, HE SAID BROWN WAS
NEVER ABOUT SITTING NEXT TO
WHITE CHILDREN.
IT WAS ABOUT HAVING ACCESS TO
THE RESOURCES.
>> AS I SAY, NO ONE WOULD SAY
THIS IS THE SAME COUNTRY AS 60
YEARS AGO.
OBVIOUSLY MANY THINGS CHANGED.
TO ME, ONE OF THE MOST IMPORTANT
THINGS THAT CHANGED IS THE
DEMOCK PHI IS OVERWHELMING IN
TERMS OF THE DEBATE.
WHEN WE THINK ABOUT THINGS LIKE
EQUALITY OF OPPORTUNITY,
USUALLY, IT'S BEEN FRAMED AS AN
ARGUMENT OF FAIRNESS.
IF WE ARE THE COUNTRY WE SAY WE
ARE IN THE DECLARATION OF
INDEPENDENCE, EVERYONE SHOULD
HAVE A CHANCE TO GO AS FAR AS
THEIR TALENTS TAKE THEM.
I THINK THAT IS STILL TRUE BUT
NO LONGER I THINK THE CENTRAL
ARGUMENT.
OVER THE NEXT 50 YEARS, THE
ESTIMATES OF ALL THE NET GROWTH
IN THE WORKFORCE WILL BE
MINORITY WORKERS.
THE NUMBER OF WHITE PEOPLE
WORKING IN 2030 IS PROJECTED TO
BE SMALLER THAN TODAY.
IN THAT WORLD, ULTIMATELY, THERE
IS NOT A QUESTION OF FAIRNESS
BUT SELF-INTEREST.
IF WE DON'T DO A BETTER JOB IN
GETTING MORE OF THESE KIDS INTO
THE MIDDLE CLASS, WHO WILL PAY
THE TAXES, BUY THE HOUSES,
GENERATE THE ECONOMIC ACTIVITY
THROUGH HOUSEHOLD FORMATION?
THERE'S A SELF-INTEREST ARGUMENT
HERE TO KIND OF AN OLDER WHITE
MIDDLE CLASS THAT ULTIMATELY HAS
A STAKE IN HELPING MORE OF THESE
KIDS SUCCEED BECAUSE WITHOUT
MORE OF THEM SUCCEEDING IT WILL
BE AWFULLY HARD TO SUSTAIN
SOCIAL SECURITY AND MEDICARE
THEY'RE RELYING ON.
>> Ifill: WHERE ARE THE
AVAILABLE GOVERNMENTAL,
POLITICAL TOOLS TO GET TO THE
ROOT OF IT, WHETHER FAIRNESS OR
BEING COMPETITIVE?
>> IT'S MY JOB TO ENFORCE THE
FEDERAL CIVIL RIGHTS LAWS IN
SCHOOLS ALL OVER THE COUNTRY FOR
49 MILLION PUBLIC SCHOOL
STUDENTS AND INSTITUTIONS OF
HIGHER EDUCATION.
WE ARE AGGRESSIVELY WILL TO MAKE
SURE THE PROMISE OF BROWN IS FOR
EVERYONE.
AND THE FARM BILL EXPERIENCE,
WHICH WAS TIMELY.
WE SHUT DOWN IN THE STATE OF
VIRGINIA FOR FIVE YEARS THE
PUBLIC SCHOOLS IN THAT COMMUNITY
BECAUSE THEY DIDN'T WANT TO
INTEGRATE THERE.
IST'S AN UGLY PAST HISTORY BUT
SUCH AN INDICATOR OF WHO WE ARE
AS A COUNTRY AND WHAT WE CAN
BECOME BECAUSE AS A NATION WE
CAME TOGETHER WITH CHILDREN IN
OHIO SAVING OUR PENNIES AND
SAVING MONEY TO START NEW
SCHOOLS TO CREATE A SCHOOL
SYSTEM FOR ONE YEAR THAT WAS NOT
THAT PUBLIC SCHOOL SYSTEM, IT
WAS PRIVATELY FUNDED, INTEGRATED
TEACHERS COMING FROM ALL OVER
THE COUNTRY TO TEACH KIDS WHO
HAD BEEN OUT OF SCHOOL FIVE
YEARS WITH SERIOUS LOSSES IN
LEARNING TO BRING THEM BACK TO
MAKE ENORMOUS GAINS AND CAME
TOGETHER AS AN INTEGRATED
COMMUNITY AND SAY THIS IS WHO WE
ARE AS A NATION, REGARDLESS OF
WHOLLY WHO WE SAID WE WILL BE,
THIS IS AS A NATION WHAT WE'VE
BECOME.
THAT'S A LESSON FOR ALL OF US.
>> NO ONE DOUBTS ALL OF THIS
WOULD BE A LOT EASIER IF YOU
WERE NOT DEALING WITH SCHOOLS
THAT WERE SEGREGATED AND POVERTY
CONCENTRATED.
ROUGHLY THREE-QUARTERS OF
AFRICAN-AMERICAN KIDS AND
TWO-THIRDS OF HISPANIC IN
SCHOOLS ARE LOW-INCOME AND MAKES
THINGS HARDER.
BUT AS YOU SAY, YOU CANNOT WAIT
TO SOLVE THAT PROBLEM.
THERE ARE PLENTY OF BIG URBAN
DISTRICTS WHERE THERE ARE A LOT
OF RESOURCES.
THE ISSUE ISN'T ONLY THE AMOUNT
OF MONEY SPENT IN THE SCHOOLS,
IT'S HOW IT'S SPENT, WHAT KIND
OF RESOURCES THEY GET AND WHAT
KIND OF RESOURCES THE KIDS CAN
DRAW ON AT HOME, IN THEIR
COMMUNITY, HELPING PARENTS WORK
BETTER WITH KIDS.
WOULD IT BE EASIER TO EQUALIZE
OPPORTUNITY IF YOU DIDN'T HAVE
AS MANY KIDS STUDYING IN
POVERTY?
SURE.
BUT CAN YOU SAY WE CAN'T DO
ANYTHING TILL THAT'S SOLVED IN I
DON'T THINK YOU CAN SAY THAT.
>> Ifill: WE'VE RUN THE GAMUT.
HAVE WE RUN TO THE LIMITS OF
GOVERNMENTAL AND JUDICIAL
INTERVENTION?
>> NO, BUT IT IS TRUE THAT YOU
HAVE A LOT OF LARGE SCHOOL
DISTRICTS WITH CONCENTRATED
POVERTY IN THE CENTER, BUT THERE
ARE INNOVATIONS OUT THERE -- I
GO BACK TO THE CHEF EXAMPLE.
MANY OF THE SUBURBS SURROUNDING
HARTFORD HAD SAID WE WILL TAKE A
CERTAIN NUMBER OF KIDS TO COME
INTO OUR SCHOOL.
THERE ARE OTHERS, THE METRO
PROGRAM OF BOSTON, SO THERE'S
CROSS-DISTRICT SOLUTIONS, THERE
ARE ALSO INNOVATIONS THAT YOU
CAN DO IN TERMS OF CHANGING THE
FINANCE SYSTEM, YOU KNOW.
WHY IS IT?
WE HAVEN'T REALLY TRIED THESE
MANY PLACES BUT WHY IS IT THAT
STATES REQUIRE SCHOOLS TO BE
FUNDED BASED ON PROPERTY TAXES?
>> Ifill: CHERYL BROWN
HENDERSON, SINCE YOUR LIFE SPAN
AND THE ARC OF YOUR LIFE TRACED
BROWN V BOARD, I WANT TO KNOW
WHETHER ON THE 60th
ANNIVERSARY YOU FIND YOURSELF
OPTIMISTIC OR PESSIMISTIC ABOUT
WHERE WE ARE NOW.
>> OPTIMISTIC.
BROWN DISMANTLED THE LEGAL
FRAMEWORK FOR ANY KIND OF
DISCRIMINATION, WHETHER AGAINST
WOMEN OR PEOPLE WITH
DISABILITIES OR WHATEVER, AND
DID A HUGE THING FOR THIS
NATION.
SO I TRY TO LOOK AT IT THAT WAY
BECAUSE IT WAS ALL ABOUT
OPPORTUNITY AND IT SUCCEEDED
WHEN IT COMES TO THAT, OPENED
THE DOORS TO LEGAL CASES AND THE
LEGISLATION THAT CAME AFTER.
SO I'M OPTIMISTIC.
WHAT WE DIDN'T DO THAT I WOULD
LOVE TO SEE US DO IN TERMS OF
BEING OPTIMISTIC IS TO HAVE SOME
SORT OF RECONCILIATION.
I LOOK AT NELSON MANDELA AND
WHAT HAPPENED IN SOUTH AFRICA.
HE WAS AMAZING.
WHERE'S THE COURAGE TO HAVE THAT
KIND OF RECONCILIATION AND THAT
DIALOGUE?
AFTER BROWN V. BOARD, WE MISSED
A HUGE OPPORTUNITY.
I TAUGHT SCHOOL IN THE '70s AT
ONE OF THE SCHOOLS THAT WAS
SEGREGATED WHERE MY MOTHER AND
SISTER AND KIDS WENT, I TAUGHT
THERE POST-BROWN.
BUT I DISCOVERED MY WHITE
COLLEAGUES DIDN'T WANT TO BE
THERE, STILL 95%
AFRICAN-AMERICAN.
SO WE MISSED AN OPPORTUNITY TO
SIT THE EDUCATORS DOWN, TALK
ABOUT RECONCILIATION, THEIR JOB,
CHILDREN BEING CHILDREN,
EDUCATION AS A VALUE AND THEY
BEING CHARGED WITH THE
RESPONSIBILITY OF IMPARTING THAT
EDUCATION.
SO WHY ARE WE EVEN PONDERING --
WHY ARE WE STILL DRAGGING OUR
FEET WHEN THEY PUT THAT WORD IN
THE DECISION?
WHY THAT WORD WHEN IT MEANS
PAINSTAKINGLY SLOW?
THE ONLY THING THAT SCARES ME,
TOO, IS WHEN YOU LOOK AT PARENTS
INVOLVED IN COMMUNITY SCHOOLS
BACK IN 2004, AND THE SUPREME
COURT RULED AGAINST THEM, THAT
WAS VOLUNTARY.
SO IF PEOPLE ARE GOING TO COME
ALONG, CHALLENGE VOLUNTARY
PROGRAMS AND HAVE A COURT THAT
WOULD STRIKE DOWN THOSE
VOLUNTARY PROGRAMS, THAT'S
FRIGHTENING TO ME.
>> Ifill: ONE OF THE THINGS WE
CAN DO IS KEEP LOOKING BACKWARD
AND FORWARD AS WE ACKNOWLEDGE
THESE SERIES OF ANNIVERSARIES WE
HAVE BEEN DOING THE LAST YEAR
OR.
SO CHERYL BROWN HENDERSON,
RONALD BROWNSTEIN, SHERYLL
CASHIN AND CATHERINE LHAMON,
THANK YOU ALL SO MUCH FOR A
GREAT CONVERSATION.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Woodruff: ONLINE WE HAVE A
TALE OF TWO CITY HIGH SCHOOLS
ONLY FOUR MILES APART-- ONE, A
VIBRANT MODEL FOR DIVERSITY, AND
THE OTHER, ISOLATED BY RACE AND
POVERTY.
THAT'S ON OUR EDUCATION PAGE.
AND TO THE ANALYSIS OF SHIELDS
AND BROOKS.
THAT'S SYNDICATED COLUMNIST MARK
SHIELDS AND "NEW YORK TIMES"
COLUMNIST DAVID BROOKS.
WELCOME, GENTLEMEN.
SO WE JUST HEARD GWEN'S
DISCUSSION.
IT IS 60 YEARS AFTER THE BROWN
VS. BOARD OF EDUCATION RULING,
AND WE KNOW, MARK, THAT, YES,
THERE HAS BEEN DRAMATIC CHANGES
IN THE AFTERMATH OF THAT, BUT WE
ALSO KNOW AND WE'VE GOT A
GRAPHIC TO SHOW THIS THAT
MUCH -- SOME OF THE COUNTRY,
MAYBE EVEN MUCH OF THE COUNTRY
IS STILL SEGREGATED.
HERE YOU SEE, THIS IS A CHART
SHOWING THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN
1968, 2011, BIG DROP IN THE
PERCENTAGE OF AFRICAN-AMERICAN
STUDENTS ATTENDING MAJORITY
BLACK/LATINO SCHOOLS IN THE
SOUTH WHERE SEGREGATION WAS MOST
PREVALENT.
YOU KNOW, HERE, IT'S A DRAW.
FROM 78 TO 34%.
BUT WE SEE DROPS IN THE MIDWEST
AND WEST.
MARK, IS IT SURPRISING THAT IN
THE NORTHEAST THE PERCENTAGE OF
AFRICAN-AMERICAN STUDENTS HAS
RISEN?
>> I DON'T KNOW IF IT'S
SURPRISING, JUDY.
I THINK THAT SHERYLL CASHIN --
FIRST OF ALL, REMEMBER THIS ON
THAT DECISION, IT WAS 9 TO 0.
IF YOU WANT TO SEE A GREAT
POLITICIAN AT WORK, IT WAS EARL
WARREN.
THANK GOD YOU HAD A GOVERNOR WHO
HAD ACTUALLY BEEN THROUGH THE
PROCESS.
HE ASSEMBLED THE 9-0.
I THINK SHERYLL CASHIN PUT IT
WELL IN YOUR DISCUSSION WITH THE
PANELISTS AND THAT IS IT'S A
QUESTION OF PLACE, NOT RACE.
WE'RE TALKING ABOUT INCOME
INEQUALITY, WE'RE TALKING ABOUT
PROPERTY INEQUALITY.
THAT'S ESSENTIALLY WHAT LEADS TO
SCHOOL PATTERNS AND SCHOOL
POPULATIONS.
>> I SUSPECT THEY WOULD HAVE
BEEN SURPRISED IF WE HAD GONE
BACK AND ASKED WHAT DO YOU
EXPECT OVER THE NEXT 50 YEARS, I
SUSPECT THEY WOULD HAVE THOUGHT
THERE WOULD HAVE BEEN A LITTLE
MORE PROGRESS THAN WE
EXPERIENCED.
THERE WAS A SUPPOSITION THAT
ONCE YOU TOOK AWAY SOME OF THE
LEGAL BARRIERS THE SOCIAL
BARRIERS WOULD FOLLOW MORE
QUICKLY THAN THEY HAVE.
THIS IS MEASURABLE NOT ONLY IN
SCHOOLS BUT SOCIAL INTERACTION,
WHEN YOU MEASURE HOW MANY PEOPLE
ARE HAVING REAL INTERACTIONS
WITH PEOPLE OF DIFFERENT RACES,
WE'VE MADE SURPRISING LITTLE
PROGRESS, ESPECIALLY IN THE
FIRST FEW YEARS AFTER BROWN AND
THE CIVIL RIGHTS ACT, BUT IN THE
LAST COUPLE OF DECADES, IT'S
SURPRISINGLY SLOW, AND THAT THE
BECAUSE OF THE FACT BIRDS OF A
FEATHER FLOCK TOGETHER AND SAY
WE AID IN PART BECAUSE OF THE
DISCRIMINATION BUT IN PART
BECAUSE OF A LOSS OF EMPHASIS ON
INTEGRATION, THAT THERE WAS IN
THE '70s AND '80s LESS
EMPHASIS ON INTEGRATION, MORE
MULTICULTURALISM AND THINGS LIKE
THAT.
AND YOU HAVE TO KEEP PUSHING AND
PUSHING.
MAYBE PEOPLE UNDER 20 WILL BEGIN
TO SEE A SHIFT BUT PROGRESS HAS
BEEN SLOW.
>> Woodruff: WHAT KIND OF
PUSHING?
>> WE'RE IN A NON-AFFIRMATIVE
ACTION REGIME BASED ON RACE BUT
YOU HAVE TO PUSH STILL BASED ON
OTHER THINGS, BASED ON
COMPANIES, UNIVERSITIES,
SCHOOLS, I THINK, DO HAVE TO PAY
ATTENTION TO THIS, AND NOT ONLY
GETTING PEOPLE IN, BUT ONCE IN,
ENSURING THE SOCIAL INTERACTIONS
THERE AND THERE'S NOT
SEGREGATION IN THE CAFETERIAS.
>> NO, BUT SEGREGATION IS
ENCOURAGED BY COLLEGES.
>> Woodruff: STUDENT HOUSING.
BY STUDENT HOUSING, CULTURAL
HOUSING AND ALL THE REST OF IT.
I WANT TO POINT OUT THAT ALL THE
GENDER RACIAL SUBGROUPS IN THE
COUNTRY, THE HIGHEST PER CAPITA,
THOSE ENROLLED IN COLLEGE, IS
BLACK WOMEN.
BLACK WOMEN ENROLLED IN COLLEGES
AND UNIVERSITIES IS A HIGHER
LEVEL THAN WHITE WOMEN, ASIAN
WOMEN, WHITE MEN.
BLACK MEN ARE ENROLLED IN A
HIRING LEVEL PER CAPITA THAN
WHITE MEN.
WE'VE QUADRUPLED THE NUMBER OF
BLACK COLLEGE GRADUATES IN LESS
THAN A GENERATION.
SO THERE IS GOOD MOVES, AND I AM
CURIOUS THAT WE HAVE TO PAUSE
ANAND REFLECT ON THE GOOD NEWS.
>> Woodruff: ON THE GENDER
ASPECT.
>> AND THE RACIAL ASPECT AS
WELL.
>> Woodruff: WELL, COMPLETE
CHANGE OF SUBJECT, AND THAT IS
PRESIDENTIAL POLITICS 2016,
DAVID.
WE SAW BOTH FORMER PRESIDENT
CLINTON, FORMER SECRETARY OF
STATE HILLARY CLINTON COME OUT
SWINGING THIS WEEK AFTER KARL
ROVE WHO, OF COURSE, WAS FORMER
PRESIDENT GEORGE W. BUSH'S TOP
POLITICAL STRATEGIST SUGGESTED
SECRETARY CLINTON MIFFED BRAIN
DAMAGE FROM A FALL SHE TOOK
WHILE STILL IN GOVERNMENT.
>> HE SAID SHE WAS IN THE
HOSPITAL AND WE SHOULD GET TO
THE BOTTOM OF ALL THIS.
>> Woodruff: IS THIS THE KIND
OF EXCHANGE WE'RE GOING TO SEE
WHERE, IN FACT, PRESIDENT
CLINTON SAID TO GWEN IN AN
INTERVIEW, HE SAID, WE CAN JUST
EXPECT THIS FROM REPUBLICANS?
>> YEAH, WELL, A COUPLE OF
THINGS GOING ON.
FIRST, I HOPE ROVE WAS JUST
SPEAKING OFF THE CUFF BECAUSE IT
WAS PRETTY STUPID WHAT HE SAID,
INACCURATE AND STUPID.
THE RESPONSE WAS INTERESTING.
BECAUSE THERE HAS BEEN, AMONG
THE PROFESSIONAL PEOPLE LIKE US
WHO WATCH THIS THING FOR A
LIVING, THERE HAVE BEEN SOME
WHISPERS AMONG PEOPLE WHO KNOW
WHAT THEY'RE TALKING ABOUT THAT
MAYBE SHE WON'T RUN, BUT THE WAY
THE CLINTONS CAME OUT SWINGING
MADE IT LOOK LIKE SHE WAS GOING
TO RUN.
IF YOU HAVE A RACE IN A
DEMOCRATIC PRIMARY, PLAYING WITH
KARL ROVE, THAT'S GOOD AND
WORKING WITH THE KOCH BROTHERS,
THAT WORKS WELL.
SO MAY BE MORE FORWARD LEANING
ABOUT THIS DEAL THAN ANYBODY WHO
THOUGHT THEY WEREN'T.
AND I STILL THINK THAT I'M LESS
BULLISH ON HER CHANCES.
I THINK IT'S LIKELY SHE'LL GET
THE NOMINATION IF SHE RUNS BUT
LESS BULLISH THAN OTHERS AROUND
HERE BECAUSE I THINK THE PARTY
HAS MOVED TO THE LEFT, THE
DEBLASIO MAYOR'S RACE IN
NEW YORK, EVEN THE RACE IN
NEWARK WHERE THE MORE LEFTWARD
CANDIDATE WON, I THINK THE PARTY
SHIFTED A LITTLE AWAY FROM HER
AND I THINK THERE'S SOME SHOT
IT'S WON'T BE A CAKEWALK FOR
HER.
>> 330 DAYS IN THE HOSPITAL,
WRONG.
THREE DAYS IN THE HOSPITAL.
AND THAT SHE WAS WEARING GLASSES
ONLY GIVEN TO PEOPLE WITH
TRAUMATIC BRAIN INJURY, THAT WAS
KARL ROVE.
I NEVER SAW DR. ROVE MAKING
HOUSE CALLS LIKE THIS
(LAUGHTER)
IT'S A LITTLE BIT LIKE PUTTING
HEROIN IN THE BLOODSTREAM.
YOU LET OUT A BUBBLE OR RUMOR
AND LET IT GO.
OH, WHERE DID IT COME FROM?
SOMEBODY HEARS IT, A COUPLE OF
MONTHS LATER, SOMETHING OF THE
SORT.
IT'S SYMPTOMATIC OF A TEXAS
CANDIDATE, A CONGRESSMAN IN
TEXAS, IN A KARL ROVE CLIMATE,
WHO HAD A VERY DIFFICULT
OPPONENT AND SAID I'M GOING TO
ACCUSE MY OPPONENT OF BEING
ROMANTICALLY AND SEXUALLY
INVOLVED WITH BARN YARD ANIMALS.
AND SAID YOU CAN'T DO THAT,
CONGRESSMAN, YOU HAVE NO
EVIDENCE OF PROOF, AND THEY
SAID, I KNOW, I JUST WANT TO SEE
HIM DENY IT.
THAT'S LIKE THIS.
IT WAS STUPID AND DID HELP THE
CLINTONS AND CAN TELL US
SOMETHING ABOUT THE HIGH LEVEL
WE EXPECT IN 2016.
>> IT WON'T BE AN ISSUE IF SHE
RUNS.
IF YOU CAN RUN, YOUR HEALTH IS
FINE, AND, SO, IF SHE'S RUNNING
AND SHE CAN DO IT THE WAY EVERY
CANDIDATE HAS TO DO IT, HER
HEALTH WILL NOT BE AN ISSUE.
>> Woodruff: WHAT ABOUT
DAVID'S OTHER POINT THAT MAYBE
HILLARY CLINTON, ASSUMING SHE
DOES DECIDE TO RUN, MAY NOT HAVE
THAT EASY PAST OF  A NOMINATION?
>> I THINK INEVITABLE IS THE
CAMPAIGN STRATEGY.
EVERYBODY'S FOR HILLARY, WHY?
BECAUSE EVERYBODY'S FOR HILLARY,
BECAUSE SHE'S IN ALL THE POLLS.
I THINK THERE IS A RESTLESSNESS
IN THE DEMOCRATIC PARTY AGAINST
THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION,
ALTHOUGH UNSPOKEN IN LARGE PART,
BUT THE FACT THAT ALL OF THE
PEOPLE WHO BROUGHT THIS COUNTRY
TO ITS KNEES IN THE WALL STREET
CRISIS CONTINUE TO GO TO DINNER
PARTIES AND FLY OUT IN PRIVATE
JETS AND GET WELCOMED TO THE
WHITE HOUSE AND THEY PAY FINES,
WHICH IS BASICALLY MONETIZED
FINANCIAL CRIME.
JUST PAY A CHECK.
NOBODY GOES TO JAIL.
AND ELIZABETH WARREN IS PROBABLY
THE CATALYST FOR THAT, THE MOST
LOGICAL POINT.
SOMEBODY WILL PICK THAT UP.
MRS. CLINTON MAY VERY WELL TRY
TO MOVE IN THAT DIRECTION,
ALTHOUGH COMING AS A SENATOR
FROM NEW YORK, IT WILL BE A
DEPARTURE.
>> Woodruff: AND WE HAVE AN
INTERVIEW WITH SENATOR WARREN ON
THE "NewsHour" MONDAY NIGHT.
YOU WERE PUTTING IN A PLOY.
THE TEARNGHTS DAVID, THEY WON A
SENATE PRIMARY IN THE MID-TERM
ELECTION SEANS BUT DON'T SEEM TO
BE ON AS STRONG A PATH, WHATEVER
YOU WANT TO CALL IT, THE
MAINSTREAM, THE ESTABLISHMENT OF
THE REPUBLICAN PARTY SEEMS TO BE
DOING BETTER.
WHAT'S GOING ON?
>> ESPECIALLY IN THIS CASE IN
NEBRASKA THIS WEEK, THE TEA
PARTY CANDIDATE SAYS HE'S A YALE
Ph.D. AND THE OTHER HARVARD
LAW DEGREE.
THESE ARE NOT CLASSIC OUTSIDERS,
I WOULD SAY, BUT I DO THINK THE
PARTY HAS BECOME MORE NERVOUS OF
LOSING SEATS.
THE VOTERS -- IT'S LESS OVER
IDEOLOGY AND MORE OVER APPROACH.
IT'S CAN YOU COME INTO
WASHINGTON AND DO POLITICS, DO
GOVERNANCE AS OPPOSED TO BEING
SORT OF A COMMENTATOR WHEN YOU
GET HERE.
SO I DO THINK THE SIDE OF THE
PARTY THAT SAYS, YOU KNOW, LET'S
PASS LEGISLATION, AND THEY'RE
PLENTY CONSERVATIVE, BUT THEY
HAVE THE MOMENTUM NOW.
AND I THINK THE GOVERNOR WAS A
MAJOR TURNING POINT.
>> TED CRUZ AND MIKE LEE WERE
STAUNCH SUPPORTERS OF THE
NEBRASKA WINNER AND THEIR
MESSAGE WAS WE NEED
REINFORCEMENT TO FIGHT THE
ENTRENCHED LEADERSHIP IN
WASHINGTON.
>> Woodruff: THIS IS IN
NEBRASKA.
>> IN NEBRASKA.
I THINK THE TEA PARTY HAD ITS
MOST IMPORTANT VICTORY AND WE
CAN SEE IT EVERY DAY AND THAT
WAS IN KENTUCKY.
MITCH MCCONNELL WENT HAT IN HAND
AND ASKED RAND PAUL FOR HIS
ENDORSEMENT, AND RAND PAUL WAS
FA A NATIONAL FIGURE, A IMAGINE
LEADER OF HIS PARTY, ENDORSED
MITCH MCCONNELL AND PROBABLY
THERE BE SECURITY THE -- THEREBY
SECURED THE FACT MCCONNELL WOULD
BE RENOMINATED.
THAT'S HOW IMPORTANT THE TEA
PARTY IS, THAT MENTION MCCONNELL
OPPOSED IN 2010 WHEN HE RAN IS
NOW HIS SUPPLECANT IN HIS DEATH.
WE'LL HAVE MUCH MORE OPPORTUNITY
TO TALK ABOUT THE TEA PARTY.
WE THANK YOU BOTH.
>> Woodruff: AGAIN, THE MAJOR
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE DAY.
INDIA ELECTED A NEW RULING PARTY
WITH THE HINDU NATIONALIST PARTY
WINNING IN A LANDSLIDE.
FIREFIGHTERS TAMED FIVE OF THE
TEN WILDFIRES BURNING IN
SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA, THANKS TO
COOLER TEMPERATURES AND CALMER
WINDS.
AND THE U.S. DEPARTMENT OF
TRANSPORTATION SLAPPED A MAXIMUM
$35-MILLION FINE ON GENERAL
MOTORS FOR MISHANDLING ITS
IGNITION SWITCH DEFECTS.
ON THE NEWSHOUR ONLINE, A
13,000-YEAR-OLD WISDOM TOOTH HAS
GIVEN SCIENTISTS NEW EVIDENCE
FOR THE ORIGIN OF EARLY
AMERICANS.
THE TOOTH BELONGED TO A TEENAGE
GIRL WHOSE REMAINS WERE
DISCOVERED IN AN UNDERWATER CAVE
IN MEXICO.
READ WHAT DIVERS FOUND THERE ON
OUR SCIENCE PAGE.
ALL THAT AND MORE IS ON OUR WEB
SITE, newshour.pbs.org.
AND A REMINDER ABOUT SOME
UPCOMING PROGRAMS FROM
OUR PBS COLLEAGUES.
GWEN IFILL IS PREPARING FOR
"WASHINGTON WEEK," WHICH AIRS
LATER THIS EVENING.
HERE'S A PREVIEW:
>> Ifill: ERIC SHINSEKI IS ON
THE HOT SEAT AT THE V.A.
THE BEHIND THE SCENES DEBATE ON
IMMIGRATION.
WHAT THE LATEST ROUND OF
MID-TERM PRIMARIES TELL US ABOUT
THE NEXT ONES.
AND THE CLINTONS COME OUT
SWINGING.
WHAT, IS IT 2016, ALREADY?
LATER TONIGHT ON "WASHINGTON
WEEK."
JUDY.
>> Woodruff: AND ON TOMORROW'S
EDITION OF PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
RICK KARR REPORTS FROM OHIO ON
THE BATTLE OVER RED LIGHT AND
SPEED CAMERAS AS LAWMAKERS
CONSIDER LEGISLATION THAT WOULD
BAN THEIR USE.
WE'LL BE BACK, RIGHT HERE, ON
MONDAY.
WE TALK WITH SENATOR ELIZABETH
WARREN ABOUT HER NEW BOOK, "A
FIGHTING CHANCE."
THAT'S THE NEWSHOUR FOR TONIGHT.
I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
HAVE A NICE WEEKEND.
THANK YOU AND GOOD NIGHT.